so the next segment is going to be the
first one in the sequence of segments on
information retrieval so what is
information with TiVo it's one of the
most important tasks on the web people
search the web daily and as far as our
class is concerned natural language
processing is very useful in a variety
of information retrieval tasks so search
engines things like Google and Bing and
by dou Y and X dominate you know the
online communities people send billions
of queries every day information
interview is about building search
engines and improving them and analyzing
their results so in some examples Yahoo
search is a very common search engine
here we have a query the word that bola
and then we have a list of documents
that are returned by the system Amazon
is a different type of search engine
that involves products the input is the
product name such as Samsung Galaxy the
output is a list of products that match
this description and their properties
there are other types of search engines
out there for example the Library of
Congress website where you can search
for books based on topics and authors
and publication years and many other
search criteria so in addition to
conventional search engines such as
library catalogs where you can search by
keywords titles and authors you can also
have search engines based on text for
example LexisNexis Google and Yahoo are
you typically allowed to search by
keywords and there's a limited support
for queries and natural language there
are also image based search engines
where you can search for images based on
shapes and colors and also the keywords
that appear in their captions and
descriptions and you can also have
question answering systems for example
ascom that specialize in answering
natural language questions we discussed
those in a separate section of this
class and there also are some
experimental clustering systems also
more old examples of those includes the
V Seamon class T where the results are
shown in the form of clusters of related
documents if we have a word that is
multiple senses each of those senses
will get
separate cluster of results for example
if the word is Jaguar you don't the
system doesn't know if you're looking
for the car or the animal or the
football team and it will figure out
that you have multiple senses of that
word and then it will give you the
results for each of them separately and
the last type of search engines that I
want to mention our research systems
such as lemur and lunch which are mostly
used for research projects let's look at
what kind of chaos con the internet
shows up or how to get rid of stretch
marks or just single words like dodge or
names of people or questions like how
many calories are in pumpkin pie even
with a typo in this example more
examples of queries Angelina Jolie and
Brad Pitt how to vote Derek Jeter
interstellar trailer that those last
example shows that they're looking for
some specific object namely the movie
trailer from a specific movie
interstellar they also asking
definitional questions for example what
is a ball so I extract those from a
website that's part of Google that shows
the most commonly asked where is on any
given day so how large is the web
well according to world wide web sites
in 2014 there about 45 billion pages
indexed by Google and 25 billion indexed
by Bing so this is a fairly large number
and here's some more statistics about
the web so it has been reported that
Twitter gets about 400 million tweets
per day about 2.5 billion photos are
uploaded to Facebook every month and
that Google's clusters process more than
20 petabytes of data per day so what are
some of the challenges in information
retrieval for example dealing with
things like dynamically generated
content so pages that are not static but
rather get their output based on the
user query any indexing of new pages
that get added to the web at any point
in time in a decentralized fashion the
increasing number of blog posts it
has been said that the size of the block
was feared bubbles about every six
months so what kind of quiz do users
pose on the Internet well turns out that
they're usually in the form of sessions
so users ask one query and then they
come back and revisit it later because
there's two interested in the same topic
they may he plays some of the words add
some of the words to get better is out
so possibly start with a completely
different query but still within the
same session they often ask very short
queries the median number of words in a
query on the Internet is about two words
long there's a large number of typos and
a small number of popular queries so
there's a power-law distribution of the
frequency of queries and a very long
tail of infrequent queries that are only
asked once or twice in any given time
period even though such changes are
provide advanced query operators such as
word one near word 2 or word one
immediately adjacent to word 2 or and in
our operations most users don't use
those except for phrases which users
have learned should be included in
double quotes so what is information
retrieval it's a very important process
that involves a collection of documents
a user's query and the goal of this
process is to find the relevant
documents that match the users query so
here's some of the key terms used in
information retrieval cookies and a
presentation of what the user is looking
for it can be a list of words or a
phrase a document is some information
entity that the user wants to receive a
document doesn't have to be a single
webpage it can be a passage or it can be
an entire website a collection is a set
of documents and an index is like a
presentation of the information that
makes the automatic process of querying
easier a term is a word or concept that
appears in the document or query so
let's look at documents or documents are
not just printed paper they can be as I
said any sort of Records or pages entire
sites images people movies books and so
on
they are often encoded in many different
formats so there has to be some process
that converts them to some standard
representation from
sample Unicode documents have to be
represented internally in the computer
and they have to be pre process for
example metadata has to be removed
JavaScript and some additional notations
have to be removed and the documents
further have to be segmented into words
and terms and also are in two types and
tokens so just to remind you a type is
just a set of all the currencies of the
same word and the token is every
particular instance of that particular
word so what does the search engine look
like we first have to decide what we
want to index well then we have to
collect that information index it
efficiently and we have to make sure
that the index is kept up-to-date and
then once we have built the index we
have to make sure to provide a
user-friendly query facilities so here
is the architecture of a typical search
engine we have our information sources
in the document collector that creates a
document collection then we have a
document processor that converts the
documents into an index now on the other
side we have a query that gets processed
by the query processor to form a query
representation and then there's a
mapping between the documents and the
queries to a process called document and
hanging which processes the input
documents finds which ones are similar
to the user's query and it turns search
results which are then shown to the user
in the search interface then the user
looks at those documents and decides
which ones are relevant and which ones
are not
and then possibly it advises their
information need and starting with a
completely new query or they can just go
back to the search engine and go to the
next page of hits for example by
essentially saying that the first page
of hits was not good enough in many
search engines it's possible to update
the query and produce a completely
different ranking from that so how our
documents are presented well they are
presented in the form of term document
matrices so we have M terms and n
documents or they can also be
represented in document document
matrices so this is a matrix of n
documents by n document which represents
how similar the two documents are so in
a medium-sized collection we will have
something like n equals
three million documents and M equals
50,000 terms if you multiply those two
numbers together you'll get the size of
a typical term document matrix for
medium-sized collection in the case of
the web however we get something much
bigger as we said there may be as many
as 30 billion documents on the web and
the size of the vocabulary or the size
of the number of different terms that we
want the index may be a 1 billion and
above so you can see that this is an
enormous large matrix that cannot be
stored on most computers so we have to
figure out some other ways to represent
this information one other thing is that
we can store inside this matrix either
boolean values or integer values so
boolean values just say that the
specific term appears in that particular
document whereas an integer value we'll
get presents the number of times that
this term appears in that document so
how do we store data for information
retrieval purposes let's go back to our
example with three million documents and
50,000 words in the vocabulary so how
long do you think that term document
matrix is going to be in this example is
there any way to do better than that so
instead of having this large number of
cells is then heuristic that we can use
to simplify the amount of storage this
is necessary well it turns out that
there is such a technique it's called
the inverted index so instead of an
incidence vector which is thousands
which documents contain a particular
words we have something called the
posting table so posting table just
tells us that for any given word we
store only the list of documents where
that word appears so instead of having
let's say 3 million of values most of
which are 0 we just keep the ones that
are nonzero so Vermont may appear in
document 1 document two and document six
and Massachusetts may appear in
documents 1 5 6 and 7
so we can also use linked lists so that
we can insert new document postings in
order to keep the list sorted and we can
also use the linked list to remove
existing posting so for example in the
example above if a document 5 no longer
contains the words Massachusetts we can
immediately delete
d-5 from the shorted linked list and
just keep d1 d6 and d7 so this kind of
inverted index can be very easily used
to compete document frequency and one
hint is that if you keep everything
shorted you're going to have a
logarithmic improvement in access so you
can find where a certain element is in
the list in the logarithmic time so what
are some of the basic operations that we
can perform on inverted indexes the
first one is conjunction what does that
mean we have two words and we want to
find which documents include both of
those words it turns out the days
evasive algorithm for this week an
iterative ly merge the two posting lists
by going left to right in increasing
order and the complexity of this is on
the order of X plus y which is the sum
of the lengths of the two postings the
algorithm for disjunction is very
similar
just a reminder disjunction would be
finding all the documents that contain
one or the other of the words negation
is a little bit more difficult because
we have to deal with the documents that
don't contain the word and they can be a
lot more of those than the ones that
contain it so for example if I cookies
Vermont
and not Massachusetts or a Massachusetts
or not Vermont so it's possible to build
a recursive operation so that we can
deal with parentheses and we can also
optimize the inverted indexes by
starting with the smallest set so for
example if I have three words a or B or
C we may want to start by looking at the
combining a and B into one query so that
the result forms of smaller set of
documents and then we can combine that
set of documents with the set it
corresponds to the third word
so documents are typically represented
in the so called vector model we have an
N dimensional space that has the
different terms 1 2 & 3 for example and
then each of the documents is
represented as a vector in that vector
space and if you remember from another
lecture we can find a similarity between
two documents in this vector space by
taking the angle of the two vectors that
correspond to them or by taking the
cosine of that angle so queries are
often represented the same way as doc
humans and this has several important
advantages it's mathematically easier to
manage so for example the formulas for
computing similarity applied to
documents and queries to just pairs of
documents with just pairs of queries
exactly the same way but there's some
pollens Cooley's are as we said before
shorter than documents so there has to
be some additional processing necessary
so for example for query doesn't contain
any of the words in the document you may
want to have some additional query
expansion so that you can actually get
some matching documents and they also
syntactic differences documents are
typically syntactically well-formed
whereas queries are not and there's also
problem with the repetitions of words or
lack thereof queries typically don't
repeat words except in some limited
cases of phrasal combinations whereas
documents have many words that are
repeated so let's see how we represent
the quick as a vector just like
documents we can represent them in
vector form it's not a very efficient
representation and this is what it looks
like we have the ten words for example
in the document and labeled W 1 to W 10
and then we also have the counts of
those words number X you want to see 10
so what's the matching process we have a
document space of all the documents and
we want to find whether a document is
similar to a query or whether two
documents are similar so this can be
done using several different metrics
some of them are based on distances and
some are based on similarity so one
important thing to realize here is that
in the case of distances larger
distances means less similar whereas
large similarity means more similar so
some of those are in the Euclidean
distance the clear distance is just the
straight line distance between two
points in the vector space the Manhattan
distance is also very commonly used it
just tells you how many steps you have
to take in each dimension to get from
one point to another so for example you
can go two steps in direction of the
first term three steps in the direction
of the second term and that gives you a
Manhattan distance of five whereas the
equivalent Euclidean distance would be
the square root of two squared plus five
squared
a word overlap is just the number of
words that the two documents have in
common and the Jaccard coefficient is a
normalized version of word overlap okay
so let's look at some specific examples
of similarity measures the most commonly
used one is the cosine measure which is
just the normalized dot product energy
height is computed we have a document in
a query or we could also have two
documents in this example DS the
document Q is the query so the formula
for the cosine similarity Sigma between
the document D and the query Q is given
in the middle R we have in the numerator
the size of the intersection of the two
so doesn't the words that appear in both
of the documents then divided by the
square root of the two vectors so we
have the length of D times the length of
Q a square root of that so in terms of
the actual word counts D sub I is the
number of times that the word I appears
in the document Q sub I is the number of
times the word I appears in the query so
we can just use the formula on the right
hand side to compute the cosine the
Jaccard coefficient is very similar and
it's just the size of the intersection
of the two divided by the size of the
union of the two so here's an exercise
for you please try to do it on your own
compute the cosine scores in the
following examples
D 1 and D 2 are two documents D 1 and D
3 are not a pair of documents given the
documents D 1 which is represented as
the vector 1 3 D 2 which is 100 300 and
then finally D 3 which is represent as 3
1 so we're interested in two of those
combinations so for each of those
compute the corresponding Euclidean
distances Manhattan distances and
jacquard coefficients and figure out why
some of them match and some of them
don't match okay so the next thing that
we need to figure out is how to deal
with phase based queries so things like
New York or New Mexico New York City and
our bird Barack Obama are very commonly
used for it we don't want to be able to
match York is a city in New Hampshire
even though it contains exact words that
appear
New York City so we want to find not
only the documents contain the words in
the query but also we want those words
to appear in the right order so this is
done using a technique called positional
indexing so we're going to keep track
not just of all the words in which
documents they appear in but also of the
positions of those words in the
documents it so in that case to find a
motive word phase what we need to do is
to look for the matching mores appearing
next to each other so for example the
word new may appear in position 300 York
in 301 and city and 302 okay so now
let's see how we can do document ranking
in general well it's very
straightforward process we have to be
able to compute the similarity between
the users query and each of the
documents in the collection this is
typically done using cosine similarity
and one thing that we'll discuss a
little bit later is tf-idf waiting for
now suffice it to say that it's a
formula that gives more weight to
content words such as names and other
important words whereas low content
words or so-called stop words have low
tf-idf value so that corresponds to
prepositions and articles so once you
have found the document similarities
between the query and each of the
documents we just returned the top K
matching documents to the user and it's
also possible to do documentary ranking
where if any document returned is very
similar to the documents that have
already been returned before that we may
want to skip that document so what's the
formula for IDF well the idea is that
IDF is used to find which words appear
in fewer documents if a word appears in
too many documents that means that it's
probably not very useful that
corresponds to prepositions and articles
as I said before so IDF stands for
inverse document frequency so we want to
have a metric that is higher when the
word appears in many more documents so
if n is the number of documents in the
collection D sub K is the number of
documents that contain the term k F sub
I K is the absolute frequency of term K
I and W sub I K is the weight of term K
in document I so that is how many times
it appears so the idea is then defined
for the term k as log base 2 of n
divided by D sub K plus 1 so for example
if the word appears in all the documents
then n divided by n is equal to 1 and
log base 2 of 1 is 0 and then 0 plus 1
is equal to 1 so the lowest possible IDF
that we can get is equal to 1 if on the
other hand a certain word appears in
only a small fraction of documents for
example 1 in 10,000 that means that n
divided by D sub K is going to be 10,000
and the logarithm of that is going to be
equal to 4 base 10 or about 12 base 2 so
the IDF in this example is going to be
about 13 so we are now going to continue
with the new segment on information
retrieval